Washington, D.C. - Today U.S. Congressman Kevin Brady (R- Texas) urged the Social Security Subcommittee to examine government efforts to crack down on individuals who are receiving federal disability payments but who are no longer disabled. “Rooting out fraud in the Social Security disability system must be a priority”, said Brady, who serves on the Social Security panel. “We need to do more to make sure those who are able to work are not gaming the money that is set aside for those who truly are disabled. “Social Security reviews evaluating the medical status of disability recipients have fallen. A recent investigation by The Oregonian newspaper (“Cheaters Cost Social Security Billions”) quoted experts as saying as much as $11 billion is being paid to recipients who are no longer eligible and cited examples of how the current lack of accountability is failing the taxpayers:  “But lack of funding for those reviews has hurt the agency's chances of catching someone like Louis K. Smith."The former Portland man, who is HIV-positive, started collecting disability benefits in 1995, when he became too sick to work. A battery of drugs improved his health, and he eventually took a job clerking for a Multnomah County judge."Smith earned $31,000 a year while continuing to draw disability checks. When the judge found out, he turned him in. Two years ago, Smith pleaded guilty to wrongly collecting benefits and wasput on probation. He was ordered to repay $53,544."Today, Smith says he told agency officials that he had gone back to work but they kept depositing payments into his bank account. He decided to keep the money to help pay for medications,an act he now says was wrong.”  Bryan Denson reporting in The Oregonian, December 7, 2008The Social Security Administration is required to conduct continuing disability reviews (CDR) to evaluate the medical status of individuals receiving Social Security Disability Insurance and Supplemental Security Income.  However, over the past several years, fewer and fewer of these reviews have been conducted resulting in billions in benefits being paid out to individuals who are no longer disabled.